---
layout: post
category: post
subcategory: intermezzo
title: The Essence of Empiricism
subtitle: Empiricism and Subjectivity, 5, Part 1
date: 2025-12-02
---

Deleuze begins his *Empiricism and Subjectivity* with Hume's proposal to create a "science of humanity," anchored not in the abstract idea of the "mind" but rather in the concrete rules of the "affections."[^1] This science must be a moral science and a sociology before ever becoming a psychology, because the "mind" has neither the "constancy" nor the "universality" required to be the basis of a science.[^2]

[^1]: Gilles Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity: An Essay on Hume's Theory of Human Nature*, 1953, trans. Constantin V. Boundas (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 1991), 21. *Concrete rules* is a phrase from the much later work with Félix Guattari, *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*, 1980, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 501-514. Deleuze and Guattari's understand of "rules" in *A Thousand Plateaus* is a profound extension and radicalization of Deleuze's sense of rules in *Empiricism and Subjectivity.* Indeed, his general rule of subjectivation, as discussed last time in my "Sensible Subjects: Empiricism and Subjectivity, 4," November 23, 2025, <https://steinea.ca/2025/11/23/sensible-subjects/>, is one among many other such "concrete rules" elaborated in that later text.
[^2]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 21.

Purposiveness, sensibility, the substance of anything we might call "mind," *begins* in "pure imagination and mere fancy."[^3] Purposiveness is a flutter, a glance; it happens in *the blink of an eye*.[^4] The human being touches the world, is *in touch with* the world: moment of sense, brush of contact, infinitesimal grasp, and then again, and again, and again. Every moment a beginning, a repetition of *sense* in the sensible that is always already *going on*.[^5]

[^3]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 76.
[^4]: For the "blink of an eye," see my paper "The Torqued Horizon: Preliminary Notes on the Hypersurface of the Real," Radical Resistance: Dissent and Boundary Crossing in the Humanities, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA, April 6, 2019, <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4603405>.
[^5]: Stefano Harney and Fred Moten, *The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning and Black Study* (Wivenhoe, UK: Minor Compositions, 2013), 128.

To speak of this original touch is to speak of the human being as necessarily *hyphenated*, a being-with.[^6] Purposiveness is the mechanism whereby this hyphenation, sign of primordial distance and relation, is taken as a *rule*, the base case for a recursive operation whereby the singular case (*the unrepeatable*, *the unique*) becomes the corrective program for the repetition of appearances, becomes the very law of causation.[^7] This law is a "fiction," but an *effective* one; its subjects are possessed of a practical reason, a *praktognosia*; they know how to *make do.*[^8] The science of this making do is morality and sociology, no theoretical "minds" required.

[^6]: Hyphenation is a critical concept for my philosophy. I originally drew this concept from Fred Wah, *Diamond Grill* (Edmonton, AB: NeWest Press, 2006), and then variations of it from Martin Heidegger, *Being and Time*, 1927, trans. Joan Stambaugh, rev. Dennis J. Schmidt (New York, NY: State University of New York Press, 2010), Don Ihde, *Technology and the Lifeworld: From Garden to Earth* (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1990), Homi K. Bhabha, *The Location of Culture* (London, UK: Routledge, 2004), and Donna J. Haraway, *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2016). I elaborated upon the concept in depth in my *Fiction in the Integrated Circuit* (Master's Thesis, Trinity Western University, 2018), <https://arcabc.ca/islandora/object/twu%3A4>, and subsequent writings.
[^7]: As discussed last time, the "concept of cause" is, according to Kant, the "*crux metaphysicorum*" of Hume's philosophy. See Immanuel Kant, cited in Graciela De Pierris and Michael Friedman, "Kant and Hume on Causality," *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*, July 31, 2024, <https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-hume-causality/>.
[^8]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 75, 64; for "praktognosia," see Maurice Merleau-Ponty, *Phenomenology of Perception*, 1945, trans. Donald A. Landes (London, UK: Routledge, 2014), 141; for "making do," see Michel de Certeau, *The Practice of Everyday Life*, trans. Steven F. Rendall (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1988).

The science of humanity must, therefore, begin with a "science of the sensible," starting *in the middle* with sense as the absolute hiatus, the blink of nothingness *between things* that is, nevertheless, the possibility of sense as such.[^9] The human being is mobilized by sense, becomes a subject *by way of* this manifold exteriority in its radical difference, its constant repetition. The void is a plenum, a supersaturated field of associations, of "transitions, passages, 'tendencies,' which circulate from one to another."[^10] Caught up in this field, adrift in the flow, the human being finds itself moved by the eddies of association, and *in a blink* the easy passage of this movement becomes a tendency, the tendency a habit, the habit a subject.[^11] Not mind, but affection; not unity, but partiality.

[^9]: Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition, 1968, trans. Paul Patton (New York, NY: Columbia University Press), 56. Deleuze continues: "difference is behind everything, but behind difference there is nothing" (57).
[^10]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, x. On the void, compare Karen Barad, *What is the Measure of Nothingness? Infinity, Virtuality, Justice* (Ostfildem, DE: Hatje Cantz, 2012).
[^11]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 25, 31.

So this is where we find ourselves with Deleuze's empirical project, and where Deleuze, in turn, takes a moment to reflect on "the essence of empiricism" that he set out to examine.[^12] As Deleuze begins Chapter 5, he reminds his readers that an empirical philosophy cannot be elaborated without first addressing the "problem of subjectivity," which is to say the rather paradoxical idea that the subject "is that which develops itself."[^13] This has been the focus of the preceding chapters, and so too of this series of essays.

[^12]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 85.
[^13]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 85.

To say that the subject is that which develops itself is to say that the "content" of subjectivity (content that we described last time as a *vacuous diagram*, an *empty form*) is "mediation and transcendence," a double *movement*.[^14] The subject is an *operation*, the movement of which we have spent the above paragraphs recapitulating. Essential to Deleuze's argument is that this operation comes from outside; not *by* the subject but *in* the imagination *as* subject---the subject is not cause but effect.[^15] The double movement of subjectivation, then, is at once the "self-development" of this movement and its "becoming-other," which can also be described as the subject's "fundamental characteristics" of "belief" and "invention."[^16]

[^14]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 85.
[^15]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 23.
[^16]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 85.

The subject *believes* itself to be more than a delirium of sense (dimension of determination, the *extensive rule*, the subject's self-development or transcendence); the subject then *invents* itself *as* subject (dimension of correction, the *corrective rule*, the subject's becoming-other or mediation).[^17] The subject transcends the given, then twists about and declares its subjectivity *as* given.[^18] "I affirm more than I know"; I invent, I give names to the various repetitions of appearance, I posit nature as the unity of this appearance, I develop theoretical sciences and bodies of knowledge; in sum, I go about conducting all the activities of the project of human civilization---and all of this on the basis of a fiction: the concept of cause.[^19] "By what right" do we depend upon such "an unknown connection" for the basis of our knowledge?[^20] Deleuze contends that the "problem of truth" is, therefore, shown to be the "critical problem of subjectivity itself."[^21]

[^17]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 85. Recall also the first dimension of the general rule, *establishment* (50). The rule is established by "interest and utility" (49), which characterization is to indicate the *partiality* of the subject, its *sensibility*, its original *inclination*.
[^18]: This is what Sartre has described as the "useless passion" of human being in *Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology*, 1943, trans. Hazel E. Barnes (London, UK: Routledge, 2003), 636, 587: "The fundamental value which presides over this project [of consciousness] is exactly the in-itself-for-itself; that is, the ideal of a consciousness which would be the foundation of its own being-in-itself by the pure consciousness which it would have of itself. It is this ideal which can be called God. Thus the best way to conceive of the fundamental project of human reality is to say that man is the being whose project is to be God."
[^19]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86. Here, I must recommend Quentin Meillassoux, *After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency*, 2006, trans. Ray Brassier (London, UK: Continuum, 2008), for a thorough elaboration of this problem.
[^20]: Compare Federico Luzzi, *Knowledge from Non-Knowledge: Inference, Testimony and Memory* (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2019).
[^21]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86.

The mechanism of subjectivation is the mechanism whereby a being "extracts from that which affects it in general a power independent of the actual exercise … a pure function."[^22] This function is the diagram of purposiveness, generic thought, vacuity that takes itself as its own law. In the schematism of belief and invention, in the "secret powers" of sense, we encounter the genesis of the rule for the "presuppos[ition] [of] abstract or distinct powers."[^23] This is a restatement of Deleuze's discussion of polytheism and theism in the previous chapter. Here, Deleuze writes:

[^22]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86. We might describe this as the *conservation of a metastable potential*, an *autopoietic system* that maintains itself in order to increase the *expenditure of the cosmos*. See Gilbert Simondon, "The Position of the Problem of Ontogenesis," trans. Gregory Flanders, *Parrhesia* 7 (2009): 4-16, <https://www.parrhesiajournal.org/parrhesia07/parrhesia07_simondon1.pdf>; Humberto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, *Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living*, 1972, (Dordrecht, ND: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1980); and Thomas Nail, *Theory of the Earth* (Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press, 2021).
[^23]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86.

> nothing escapes our knowledge as radically as the powers of Nature, and nothing is more futile for our understanding than the distinction between powers and their exercise. How can we assume or distinguish them? To believe is to infer one part of nature from another, which is not given. To invent is to distinguish powers and to constitute functional totalities or totalities that are not given in nature.[^24]

[^24]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86.

In the terms of the previous chapter, polytheism posits the "*continuous existence*" of the passions as the activity of the gods and theism posits the "*distinct existence*" of objects and the world as the "Unique" as such.[^25] Together, these confusions of causality disclose the fundamental confusion of the imagination that Deleuze, in the present chapter, names a "pure function." Polytheism, then, is the rule of *belief* that "infer[s] one part of nature from another," and theism the rule of *invention* that "distinguish[es] powers" and "constitute[s] functional totalities"---a "dual system of extensive rules" that is indeed the "dual power of subjectivity."[^26]

[^25]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 78.
[^26]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86, 75, 86.

Herein lies the problem of truth. On its surface, this situation points us toward a nihilistic destruction of all sense and meaning. Knowledge is simply groundless belief and fanciful invention, a figment of the pure function of subjectivation, humanity as "the measure of all things."[^27] But insofar as our science of humanity always begins *within* a world that precedes us, a world that *includes* all the practices and knowledge of humanity applied and at work within it, we encounter a *given* that, we might say, is more than the sum of its parts, a given that is both support and field for any and all empirical study.[^28] Permit me to quote Deleuze at length:

[^27]: See my essay "Sophistics: Protagoras and the Positivists," July 19, 2021, <https://steinea.ca/2021/07/19/sophistics/>.
[^28]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 37. Indeed, nature, "the object of physics, is *partes extra partes*" and "not a whole," and yet "feeling reacts to wholes" that are not given in nature (35-36). I am reminded of key texts in twentieth century philosophy of science, specifically Werner Heisenberg, *Physics and Philosophy: The Revolution in Modern Science*, 1958 (London, UK: Penguin Classics, 2000) and Michael Polanyi, *The Tacit Dimension* (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1966).

> Undoubtedly, the subject itself is given. Undoubtedly, that which transcends the given is also given, in another way and in another sense. This subject who invents and believes is constituted inside the given in such a way that it makes the given itself a synthesis and a system. This is what we must explain. In this formulation of the problem, we discover the absolute essence of empiricism.

> We could say that philosophy in general has always sought a plane of analysis in order to undertake and conduct the examination of the structures of consciousness (critique), and to justify the totality of experience. Initially, it is a difference in plan that opposes critical philosophies. We embark upon a transcendental critique when, having situated ourselves on a methodologically reduced plane that provides an essential certainty---a certainty of essence---we ask: how can there be a given, how can something be given to a subject, and how can the subject give something to itself? Here, the critical requirement is that of a constructivist logic which finds its model in mathematics.

>The critique is empirical when, having situated ourselves in a purely immanent point of view, which makes possible a description whose rule is found in determinable hypotheses and whose model is found in physics, we ask: how is the subject constituted in the given? The construction of the given makes room for the constitution of the subject. The given is no longer given to a subject; rather, the subject constitutes itself in the given. Hume's merit lies in the singling out of this empirical problem in its pure state and its separation from the transcendental and the psychological.[^29]

[^29]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 86-87. This is a crucial passage with many resonances across other texts. Firstly, on the question of critical philosophy---"how can there be a given?"---Deleuze again, in "Control and Becoming: A Conversation Between Toni Negri and Gilles Deleuze," *The Funambulist*, February 22, 2011, <https://thefunambulist.net/editorials/philosophy-control-and-becoming-a-conversation-between-toni-negri-and-gilles-deleuze>: "What we most lack is a belief in the world, we’ve quite lost the world, it’s been taken from us." And Merleau-Ponty, *Phenomenology of Perception*, 204: "The problem of the world---and to begin with, the problem of one’s own body---consists in the fact that *everything resides within the world*." Secondly, on the constitution of the subject, see Slavoj Žižek, *Less Than Nothing: Hegel and the Shadow of Dialectical Materialism* (London, UK: Verso, 2013), 905: "We should apply here something like a weak anthropic principle: how should the Real be structured so that it allows for the emergence of subjectivity?" Thirdly, on determinable hypotheses, see Karl Popper, *The Logic of Scientific Discovery*, 1935 (London, UK: Routledge, 2005). Fourthly, on philosophy: what Deleuze names philosophy is specifically Platonic *idealism* and its myriad afterlives. Deleuze operates instead in the tradition of Heraclitean empiricism, which I have elaborated in my "Generic Science: Heraclitus, Intelligence, and the Common," March 28, 2021, <https://steinea.ca/2021/03/28/generic-science/>. I am struck how François Laruelle, in *Philosophies of Difference: A Critical Introduction to Non-Philosophy*, 1986, trans. Rocco Gangle (London, UK: Continuum, 2010), sets himself up as superseding Deleuze, but his whole generic project is already prefigured in *Empiricism and Subjectivity*. Fifthly and finally, on constructivist logic: actually looking at constructivists, from Hilbert to Badiou, might yield some interesting insights. As starting points, see Richard Zach, "Hilbert's Program," *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*, 2023, <https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hilbert-program/>, and Alain Badiou, *Being and Event*, 1988, trans. Oliver Feltham (London, UK: Continuum, 2007).

*The mind must be referred to nature*, not nature to the mind.[^30] This is the rule of empiricism. Quoting Hume, Deleuze characterizes this rule as "blind submission," and yet only in this blindness can we properly demonstrate our "sceptical disposition."[^31] This is the beginning of a thought that is always "coming and going," a thought of the "middle," a thought that is, originally and irreducibly, a *given-thought*.[^32]

[^30]: Deleuze, *Empiricism and Subjectivity*, 84.
[^31]: On blindness, see my "Being Planetary," November 17, 2017, <https://steinea.ca/2017/11/17/being-planetary/>.
[^32]: Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, *A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia*, 1980, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 25.

<br>

#### Notes
